( foliage rustling )
( insects chirping )
( bird calling )
Don't move!
MALE:
What's this?
We found him
in the trunks
a hundred footfalls
past Grove Yellow.
Arms?
None, sir.
These colors?
We didn't ask.
He's no Krady beast, is he?
No, sir, but he doesn't bear
Vori colors, either.
is too tame to be a Kradin.
Hmm... his glimpse
I hadn't fathomed
that, sir.
Well, fathom it now.
He's no nemesis,
is he?
I'm not certain
what he is, sir.
to fathom the nemesis?
Weren't you drilled
Yes, sir.
And we abhor none
but the nemesis,
do we?
None but the nemesis.
No, sir.
Then set him loose.
Didn't you hear, novice?
Thanks.
provisions.
Go take
I'm sorry, sir...
Go.
I take it you're
in charge here.
Fourth Vori Defense Contingent.
Team Leader Brone,
of the Starship Voyager.
Commander Chakotay
for my defenders.
Very sorry
to the clash
They're new
and glimpse the nemesis
all around them.
The clash?
You're at war.
You've strayed into
the fullness of it.
my shuttle came under fire.
That explains why
One of my defenders
glimpsed a vessel
falling in Grove Yellow.
Must've been yours.
Why fly so close
to this sphere?
I was on a survey mission.
of omicron radiation
I picked up traces
slowed down to take a look.
in your atmosphere, so I
As soon as I did that,
I came under attack.
I lost helm control
and had to make an emergency
transport to the surface.
It'll be the Kradin
who fired at you.
The Kradin?
Our nemesis.
I see.
Well, I tried to explain that
I had no hostile intentions,
but they just kept shooting.
supremacy in the air.
The nemesis crave
They fire on any craft that
doesn't show Kradin colors.
I tried to contact my ship,
but my communicator's
not working.
in the clash zone
All dispatching
has been suppressed.
I have to find my vessel.
Maybe it's salvageable.
That's little likely.
with the Seventh Contingent
We're ordered to cluster
two new lights from now.
to signal your people.
They'll have means
You can make the walk
with us to meet them.
but I can't wait two days.
I appreciate the offer,
I have to find my vessel now.
to return to the trunks.
It wouldn't be sharp
everywhere there.
The nemesis is
Then I'll have to do my best
to steer clear of them.
If your tactic
won't change...
It won't.
It's sharper to wait
for the new light.
your advice and wait.
Then I'll take
( quiet conversations )
Well done.
( sighs )
Provisions?
It's not so savory.
Thanks. I'm sure
it'll be fine.
They call me Rafin.
Chakotay.
Pleased to meet you.
In the trunks, di...
did you glimpse any?
Any what?
Krady beasts.
No, I didn't.
the face of the nemesis, either.
Rafin's never glimpsed
Have you, Rafin?
No.
It's my first walk
in the clash zone.
You'll glimpse them
in the Soonafter.
When you do, you'll fathom
there's no heart thumping
beneath their flesh.
How many beasts will you send
to the Wayafter, Rafin?
I... I couldn't say.
Me, I'll nullify one
for each brother and cousin
that I've lost.
And then one more after.
True or not,
my allies?
SOLDIERS:
True.
So I ask you
again, Rafin.
will you nullify?
How many
As man... as many
as I'm able.
You've got the trembles.
your trembles to rages, ally,
If you don't wrestle
the nemesis will nullify you.
This nemesis of yours--
call them beasts?
why do you
It's told they all wear
the same horrid face.
is gnarled and blistery
Their flesh...
like the rotting trunks.
flame like fire.
Their glimpses
And if you dare near enough,
their breath stinks of muck.
people say terrible things
You know, sometimes
about their enemies,
to make them seem worse
than they really are.
young Kradin soldier out there
There might be some
who's more afraid of you
than you are of him.
Nemesis wasn't scared
to fume my village...
nor scared to nullify my cousins
and brothers in their sleep.
And my old mother's mother,
too...
who never told an unkind word,
nor nullified an insect
in all her days and nights
on this sphere.
That's pretty rough.
And who but a Krady beast
would leave the nullified bodies
of mine and ours upturned...
so they'll never descend
to the gloried Wayafter.
What do you mean by "upturned"?
Which of you will walk
with Chakotay
when the new light comes?
to find his craft
but I'll be fine on my own.
I appreciate the offer,
You don't fathom the trunks
and you don't carry arms.
One of my defenders
will walk with you.
Which will it be?
You, Rafin?
S-Sir, I... I...
the stranger, sir.
I'll walk with
NAMON:
comes to clash,
If any beast
I'll nullify the beast.
Well told, Namon.
glimpses, Defenders...
Now close your
sisters and mothers.
and dream of your
Have you never nullified
another, stranger?
Killing's the worst thing
I've ever had to do.
Then the nemesis
you nullified
wasn't half so beastly
as the Kradin.
Maybe not.
we're less than nothing.
In their glimpses,
They flame our homes,
take our plantings...
make playthings
of our sisters.
If you were a Vori,
you'd crave to drive them
from this sphere
just as I do.
Maybe I would
if they did things
like that
to the people I loved.
But on the sphere
I come from,
we try to find
other ways
to resolve differences--
peaceful solutions,
negotiations.
You don't fathom
the nemesis.
No. I suppose
I don't.
Beg the Power
you believe in
that you never will.
The light will be old soon.
We'd be sharp to cluster
with the others.
In a few minutes.
getting close.
We should be
to do my tellings.
You'd be sharp
if you want to.
Go back
I've got to keep looking.
No, wait.
to walk with you.
I pledged
Glimpse there.
Doesn't look like there's
much left of my shuttle.
You'll have to make
the walk with us
to the Seventh
Contingent.
( brush rustling )
( gasps )
Don't make me kill you!
( gunshots )
How is he?
Nullified.
We beg peace from the Power
who made us Vori
BRONE:
our brother, Namon,
and we commend
to the gloried Wayafter.
What's this?
Namon's coverings.
Shouldn't they go to his family
or someone he was close to?
to the clustermark.
It's a long walk
It's sharper to blend
with the trunks.
Your fleet colors will
get us all nullified.
what happened to Namon.
I'm sorry about
mine and ours in the before
The nemesis has nullified
and will in the now.
But in the Soonafter...
we'll send them flying
from this sphere
sisters and mothers.
and go back to our
Take it.
This isn't my war.
I'm not planning
to shoot anybody.
in the trunks, you'll fire
If we greet the nemesis
like the rest.
you do my tellings, fathom?
As long as you're with us,
Fathom.
Rafin.
Yes, sir?
to fire Vori arms.
Drill Chakotay
( gunshot )
Now you.
Your glimpse is too low.
With these arms,
it's sharper
than the mark.
to aim higher
You're good.
Don't mock me.
I was paying you
a compliment.
to fire at clay marks,
It is one matter
to nullify the nemesis.
but much another
That's what Namon told,
and he told the truth
to the gloried Wayafter.
before he went
He was right.
Killing's not easy.
Risking my own days
and nights
to drive the nemesis
from our sphere...
easy as a long sleep.
that should be as
Who taught you that?
who were in the clash...
My brothers and uncles
Brone, my driller...
and Namon, my ally...
who was nullified
because of me.
fault that Namon died?
You think it's your
the coward's trembles,
If I didn't have
I would have walked with you
in the trunks...
and it would be me and not he
who went to the Wayafter.
pulled the trigger, Rafin,
You weren't the one who
being afraid of fighting.
and there's no shame in
Having the trembles is natural.
How do you fathom that?
Because I've been
in battle before,
fighting to free my people
from a nemesis called
the Cardassians.
These Cardassians...
were they beasts?
weren't very friendly.
Let's just say they
The point is,
even though I believed
in what we were doing,
I always felt fear
before a fight.
But you wrestled your trembles
to rages, didn't you?
I guess I did,
but that doesn't mean...
I was told to drill you,
Chakotay,
who've drilled me--
but it's you
drilled me to fathom the rages.
Brone.
What is it?
I don't know.
Neck-strapped and upturned.
Left to be cooked by the glare.
He's one of yours?
he's of the Seventh Contingent.
By his coverings,
Likely a scoutwalker.
Desecrated by the Kradin.
He'll never turn his face
to the Wayafter.
from the clustermark.
We're 300 footfalls
Signal the Seventh.
Again.
Why don't they answer?
their camp for some reason?
Is it possible they moved
Little likely.
to the clustermark
You two fastwalk
what you can.
and glimpse
Sir.
What?
Let me go.
Well told, novice.
and your glimpse wide.
Keep your top low
( footsteps approaching )
Sir!
What have you glimpsed?
The Seventh Contingent, sir,
nullified.
What? All of them?
At least 20 defenders
whole terrible of it.
and that's not the
They're all...
they're all...
Tell it, Rafin.
They're all how?
Like him, sir.
Upturned.
Staked to the dirt
and upturned.
Those motherless Krady beasts.
Do you glimpse the fullness
of it now, stranger?
Yes. I think I do.
Now you fathom why we name
them beasts and not men.
I'm sorry.
We're much more
than sorry...
aren't we, Defenders?
SOLDIERS:
Yes, sir!
wants your plantings.
The nemesis
SOLDIERS:
True.
He wants your homes.
He wants your sisters,
but does it suffice him
to nullify you?
SOLDIERS:
No!
No. He craves
to shame you,
mock you, keep you from
the gloried Wayafter!
We're wearied of it,
aren't we?
SOLDIERS:
Yes, sir!
We're wrestled to the rages
for it, aren't we?!
SOLDIERS:
Yes, sir!
And we're not going
to swallow it--
or in the Soonafter!
not in the now,
( gunshots )
Assault!
Sly yourselves and fire back!
( groans )
Motherless beasts!
Rafin, no! Stay down!
I'll nullify you all!
( grunts )
( gunfire continues )
Hold on.
I'm going to get
you out of here.
( cries out )
Please...
turn my face to the... Wayafter.
( breathing stops )
( gunshots, soldiers yelling)
( panting )
( distant voices )
A defender.
Mark, neighbors.
A defender!
( all talking )
Welcome to Larhana settlement,
gloried defender.
You're brightly greeted.
stardate 51082.4.
Captain's Log,
for more than two days,
After searching
we've finally located
what's left
of Commander Chakotay's
shuttle.
I can only hope the Commander
has fared better
than his vessel.
According to the Ambassador,
Commander Chakotay's shuttle
was hit by enemy fire
on the southernmost continent.
and crash-landed somewhere
Right in the middle
of the war zone.
Can we get a lock on him?
I'm afraid so.
Too much radiation from weapons.
We can't scan the surface.
Which means, we don't know
if he's still alive.
Why don't we assume
that he still is?
I should have
gone with him.
It's not your fault, Tom.
We couldn't have
anticipated this.
What we've got to do now
how to deal with it.
is figure out
B'Elanna, try to modify
the scanners,
cut through the interference.
Aye, Captain.
Neelix, what do you know
about this war?
It's vicious.
have been defending themselves
Ambassador Treen's people
against a particularly
savage aggressor
for more than a decade.
Is the Ambassador willing
to help us find Chakotay?
but he may not be able.
He's willing,
are extremely limited
His resources
on the surface is chaotic.
and the situation
But he's assured me
NEELIX:
that if his troops
do find Chakotay,
he'll receive medical attention
to the nearest command post.
and be transported
doesn't meet up
Let's hope he
"savage aggressors" first.
with these
Captain, let me lead
and bring him back.
a team down there
I understand how you feel, Tom,
one step at a time.
but let's take it
Tuvok, recontact
Ambassador Treen.
Ask for any tactical support
he's willing to provide--
maps, weapons analyses,
intelligence reports.
anyone else's life,
Before I risk
I want to know exactly
what we're getting
ourselves into.
you're a novice defender.
By your coverings,
Do I tell the truth?
Listen, there's been
a misunderstanding.
I'm not a defender.
My shuttle was shot down
by the Kradin
and I landed in the clash zone.
with one of your patrols.
I met up
They gave me this uniform.
Which Contingent?
The Fourth.
The Fourth?
They're sturdy clashers.
Tell us-- did you
and your allies
drive the nemesis
from the trunks?
We put up a brave fight.
a gloried defender
Then you're
FEMALE:
even if you claim not to be.
Marna tells the
truth, Chakotay.
among my neighbors.
You are welcome
Thank you.
That's very kind.
Do you crave anything more?
Drink? Warm coverings?
some communications equipment
What I really need is
to contact my crew.
We have no means
to signal your people.
The Kradin drove us
from our homes
MARNA:
all the machinery we had.
and plantings and took
where I might find someplace
Do you know
with communications equipment?
The re-stock unit.
how to get there?
Can you tell me
It's not very near--
at least 10,000 footfalls
through the thick
of the trunks.
Then I'd better get started.
The new light is coming.
Rest till then.
Yes, please,
Chakotay.
the new light.
Rest until
I think I will.
Come, neighbors.
Let's give Defender
Chakotay some quiet.
if you crave more.
I wanted to know
No, thank you.
Oh.
But it was delicious.
And the blossoms?
Do you like them?
I planted them myself.
They're very pretty.
I've heard tellings
that the Kradin
leave our nullied defenders
upturned.
Is it true?
You can tell me.
Penno says I'm too small
to be told, but I'm not.
don't respect your beliefs.
It's true the Kradin
The Kradin are beasty.
why they flamed our homes
I don't fathom
nor why they crave
to nully us all.
I don't, either.
their plantings.
We never took
We never nullied
their brothers.
So why do they hate us?
I wish I could tell you.
I understand very well.
Hate's not something
My brother's a defender, too.
Really?
He left for the clash
two plantings before.
I was much smaller then.
He was sturdy and pleasing
to glimpse in his colors.
Like you.
Maybe you've
glimpsed him.
He's called Daryo.
a lot of soldiers in the war.
There are
I only met a few of them.
He's a team leader
Defense Contingent.
of the Seventh
The Seventh?
he was with the Seventh?
Are you sure
They're very sturdy
in the clash.
Have you heard of them?
The patrol I was with
to rendezvous with them.
was supposed
Why didn't you?
You would have glimpsed him.
before we had the chance.
We were ambushed
But when you go back
to the clash
likely you'll glimpse
Daryo then.
You could take a letter to him.
I'm not going back
to the clash zone.
to the re-stock unit
I've got to get
so I can contact my ship.
Then you can bring my letter
to the re-stock unit.
Likely some defender there
can take it to Daryo.
Will you do it?
Please?
before the new light comes.
I'll go write it now
( sighing )
I wish you a good day.
CHAKOTAY:
Thank you.
Provisions for
your long walk.
Defender Chakotay.
Walk well,
Thank you both.
You've all been very kind.
Writings for
my brother.
You'll be sure
he gets them?
I'll do my best.
will be enough.
Your best
The pretty smell
of the blossoms
nemesis far away.
will hold the
keep one for yourself.
Then you'd better
( aircraft overhead )
( explosions )
( people yelling,
children crying )
FEMALE:
Father!
( crying, yelling continue )
or you'll be nullified.
Offer no opposition
cellular residue
No evidence of
on the shuttle wreckage,
Chakotay survived the crash.
so there's a chance
the wreckage was found
Well, unfortunately,
inside enemy territory.
also a chance
So there is
or killed by the nemesis.
he's been captured
on the bright side again, Tuvok.
There you go looking
What's this "nemesis"?
Ambassador Treen's people
It is the term
use to identify their enemy.
Apparently, they're vicious.
They shoot
without warning,
routinely massacre civilians.
use biochemical weapons,
If we run into them,
it's safe to say
they won't be hanging out
a welcome sign.
I want a team on the surface
as soon as possible.
I was hoping you'd say that.
Tuvok, let's get moving.
I must caution you both.
My tactical analysis
does not bode well
of such a mission.
for the success
Given the situation
in the battle zone,
a very high probability
there is
will sustain heavy casualties.
that an away team
Are you saying we should
just abandon Chakotay?
On the contrary.
with an alternative plan?
I suppose you've come up
Indeed.
that the least risky
I have concluded
course of action is for
a single crew member
to make the infiltration,
a commando unit
accompanied by
that Ambassador Treen
has agreed to provide.
When do I leave?
Fine with me.
not what Tuvok has in mind.
Something tells me that's
the logical person
Naturally, I am
to carry out this mission.
Naturally.
Get down there!
Chakotay!
I heard the explosions.
I came back to help.
What did the Kradin
do to you?
They interrogated me.
Where's your grandfather?
I don't know.
and his heart's not sturdy.
He's very gray,
He needs me to tend him.
You!
You! I want to talk
to your superior!
Hey! I'm talking to you.
I want to know
with this girl's grandfather.
what you've done
He's old and needs medical...
( grunts )
Chakotay!
Penno always tells
it'll be brighter
when the new light comes.
Your grandfather
is a wise man.
That's right.
Now get some sleep.
You'll tend me, won't you?
No matter what comes
in the Soonafter?
Close your glimpses...
of your gloried brother.
and dream
( two gunshots )
Move along, Vori.
KRADIN:
Don't shoot.
VORI:
( babies crying )
( worried voices )
We're coming.
OLD VORI:
Move along!
KRADIN:
Where are they
taking them?
I don't know.
They'll be fastwalked
to the extermination facility.
Why?
Because they're gray
and too long-lived
and the Kradin think them
unfit for toiling.
They won't make good servers,
like us.
Penno!
Karya!
Where are they taking you?
my daughter's daughter.
Be sturdy,
Who's going to tend you?
We'll glimpse each other again
in the Wayafter.
Karya!
Set him loose!
Be still.
KRADIN:
Keep your hands off her!
Don't touch her!
Halt!
What's the matter, pretty one?
Set my mother's
father loose!
man you mean?
Is that the
No! Karya!
Please!
Set him loose!
to see him suffer, do you,
You don't want
pretty one?
No.
Don't worry.
The old Vori's suffering'll
be over soon enough.
No!
Penno!
screeching waif
Take this
to the extermination
facility.
No. Chakotay.
Set me loose!
Chakotay,
help me!
You motherless beast!
Are Ambassador Treen
and his soldiers
ready to beam aboard?
Energize.
Aye, Captain.
Welcome aboard,
Ambassador.
to help us find our crewman.
Thank you for agreeing
are unnecessary, Captain.
Your thanks
bloodthirsty nemesis the Vori
Any victim of our
will always find friends
among the Kradin people.
( panting )
Chakotay...
calm now.
I'll set you loose.
upturned so long...
Sorry to leave you
myself in the trunks
but I had to shroud
till the Kradin
walked on.
from Larhana settlement?
The villagers
They were fastwalked
through the trunks.
And your defenders?
All nullified.
coming back for me.
Thank you for
You put yourself at risk.
beside us against the Kradin
And you, Chakotay, clashed
though you're a stranger
to this sphere.
I glimpsed you chancing
your days and nights
from our nemesis.
to save Rafin
when you name them beasts.
You tell the truth
now that your men are gone?
What will you do
the Fifth Contingent.
Join with
free the villagers.
They're trying to
brightly for them.
It doesn't go
I'll come with you.
No. I'll bring
you to command.
You can signal
your people.
till the Soonafter.
That can wait
In the now...
to nullify the nemesis.
you need my help
Backwalk!
The nemesis is nearing!
It's sharper to backwalk!
( explosion )
( Brone groaning )
( gunfire continues )
Brone!
AMPLIFIED VOICE:
Vori soldiers!
You are surrounded.
Lay down your arms
and surrender.
Hold your fire!
nullify me first!
You'll have to
Commander Chakotay.
Hold your fire,
Do not fire, Commander.
How do you know my name?
I am Lieutenant Tuvok.
Don't walk any closer.
Tuvok?
you back to Voyager.
I've come to bring
Nullify him, Chakotay!
It's a Kradin tactic.
I assure you,
Commander,
this is no ruse.
It is Lieutenant Tuvok.
Don't you recognize me?
He's the nemesis!
You're a Kradin beast.
You destroyed
that village,
nullified Penno;
took away Karya.
She was only a child!
They've brainwashed you,
Commander.
Look closer.
Try to recall.
Your shuttle was shot down.
These people-- the Vori--
they captured you.
No. They rescued me.
That is what they want you
to believe.
indoctrinating you, training you
But they have been
to fight their war.
and I'll nullify you.
Take one more step
You are Commander Chakotay
of the Starship Voyager.
You are a scientist,
an explorer.
You are not a killer.
Tuvok.
Yes, Commander.
wear those colors?
How can you
The Kradin...
they're beasts, murderers.
On the contrary--
who helped us locate you.
they are the ones
to a Vori training camp.
We tracked you
We infiltrated the facility,
but you were gone.
They had already
brought you here
to fight this battle.
Before today, nothing you
experienced here was real.
to conscript and train soldiers.
It is the method the Vori use
I don't believe you!
if you will lower your weapon.
I will prove it to you
( distant voices )
Do you recognize
this place?
It's Larhana
settlement.
A defender.
Mark, neighbors!
( all talking )
Defender.
Karya.
Welcome to Larhana settlement,
gloried defender.
You're brightly greeted.
stardate 51096.5.
Captain's Log,
Although Lieutenant Tuvok
has managed
to bring Commander Chakotay
safely back to the ship,
it may be some time
before his psychological wounds
are fully healed.
My guess is the Vori used
of mind control techniques,
a combination
photometric projections,
including
heightened emotional stimuli
psychotropic manipulation.
and highly sophisticated
of your hypothalamus,
From the condition
I'd say they had you
so mixed up
they could have convinced you
your own mother was a turnip.
was some sort of simulation?
Everything I experienced
Except for the battle
you were fighting
when Tuvok found you.
the simulated commandant
Apparently, attacking
marked your graduation
from basic training.
And the men I fought beside--
none of them was real?
Namon and Rafin weren't killed
in front of me?
As far as we can tell, they
were part of the simulation.
to make you bond
The idea was
with your fellow soldiers
as well as the villagers,
would enrage you.
so their deaths
Why me?
Luck of the draw.
passing through their space
You happened to be
and you were as promising
a recruit as anyone else.
the Vori have dozens
We've been told
of these training facilities
where they conscript
their own people
they're able to capture.
and any aliens
In short, Commander,
you've been subjected
DOCTOR:
to a highly sophisticated form
of propaganda.
Then the Kradin don't kill
innocent civilians?
They don't desecrate
the Vori's dead?
I don't know.
of the same kinds of atrocities.
But the Kradin accuse the Vori
I cared about the Vori,
but I hated the Kradin.
every one of them.
I wanted to kill
Evidently, that was the point.
( door opens )
NEELIX:
Captain.
Ambassador Treen would like
with the Commander.
to have a word
I wish to tell you
how pleased
to hear of your recovery.
our people are
I'm only sorry we weren't able
to rescue you sooner
from our nemesis.
Have I said something wrong?
I don't know.
If you'll excuse me, Captain.
Chakotay?
easy to stop hating
I wish it were as
as it was to start.